[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Doctor Raymond Moody
is perhaps the most influential
voice in the subject of life
after life.
The 1992 film by this name
has been a phenomenal tool
for people facing end-of-life
issues on a spiritual level.
Today, Dr. Moody is with us to
share a beautiful story of life
after life and much,
much, much more.
We've been talking off camera.
Oh my god.
We could do three, four,
five hours together.
But you know, I
wanted to do this.
Last time we met, we did
your whole life story--
your whole background--
not just academically,
but how it started morphing
into this area of work.
And so I can say
right now, anyone
that wants to know
about the backstory,
they can go to the
other interview.
This one, I just
loved the work that
was done in that film
and the representations
by the people that had died.
So much-- I thought
we just need to do--
we need to feature
them again, OK?
I know it's kind of
classic, and then
getting into the new
understandings, the nuances
of these stories,
and what's happened
to some of these people since
that film was shot, right?
So first of all, I just watched
it again for fun the other day.
And I think the one thing
that keeps standing out more
than anything is this
incredible state of love
once we can getting loosened
up from physical reality.
Can you just talk about
that for a moment?
>>RAYMOND MOODY: Well, yes.
As a psychiatrist, one of
the most interesting things
about people, to me,
is that most people
seem to be chasing something.
Like people chase power, or
money, or fame, or a few of us
chase knowledge.
But after a
near-death experience,
whatever they were
chasing before,
people come back
from that experience
saying that what life is all
about is learning to love.
As Eben Alexander and I
were talking just recently,
and it's like-- the idea we
came up with together is that
the afterlife seems to
consists primarily of love
and information--
and that people,
when they come back
from a near-death
experience, say that love
is what life is all about.
Incidentally, that
doesn't make it
necessarily much easier for
them to get that done in life.
>>REGINA: Yeah, I mean
this is the thing.
Because a lot of them, once
they go through this experience,
most of them do not want
to come back into the body.
>>MOODY: They don't.
And also they say that
when you get back here,
you still have all the
human feelings and so on.
You fly off the handle and say
things you wish you hadn't have
said and so on.
But nonetheless, from
getting to know literally
thousands of people since 1965
who have had this experience, I
can honestly say,
as a group, they
do seem to be on the right
track more than the rest of us,
by and large.
>>REGINA: So the incredible
bliss they're experiencing--
when you've kept track of
these people afterward,
how long does this
kind of afterglow
normally last for people?
>>MOODY: It doesn't change.
I've talked to people who had
their near-death experience
40 or 50 years before, and they
still remember it very vividly.
And it's the kind
of thing that--
it affects people in
a very positive way
for the rest of their lives.
>>REGINA: And you know,
when you think about this,
you wonder what this
Earth is all about.
>>MOODY: I really wonder
what it's all about.
>>REGINA: When you think that
everyone of these people goes
through this experience of
incredible grace and love
as soon as they're out of
the physical body, have you--
I mean, I'm sure you've spent
time thinking about it--
what is this that
we're doing here
that really results in such
incredible pressure and pain
compared to what happens as
soon as we get out of this?
>>MOODY: Well, that's very
interesting that you ask me
that question and that you
might even listen to my answer--
and that I've got to say with
all sense of humor on this one.
Because nobody knows is the
answer to your question.
But I guess my take on it, as
an undergraduate philosophy
student and then later
PhD in philosophy
and a professor
of philosophy well
before I went to
medical school, that's
just part of philosophy-- to
think about these big issues.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MOODY: And one of the
big philosophical problems
that gets involved with
the afterlife question
is the question of what
it is that constitutes
our personal identity.
Plato was the person, more than
anybody else who, in the West,
came up with this notion
of soul but was taken up
into Christianity.
And Plato's idea was that our
personal identity consists not
of our body but of our soul.
But then as time
went on, then it
got up to that time of
Thomas Hobbes and so on.
And people were beginning
to realize that that was
a kind of not-too-plain notion.
Then John Locke, for example,
said that our personal identity
consists of our memories.
But in reality, nobody knows.
But this is my conjecture.
The closest answer,
to me, I think was--
when I was a kid, I
read this book by--
several books by Elie Wiesel.
And in one of his
books, he said,
God made man because
he loved stories.
And I think about it.
You know, if you
think about what
is your life except your story?
And so I kind of think
that wonderful question
you just asked, what is this?
Well, at 73, I'm not worried
about people calling me
psychotic or anything anymore.
So, I never was much anyway, but
I think that this is narrative.
I mean, I have a sort
of narrative idea
of personal identity.
Whatever new thing happens
to you, what happens
is that you incorporate
it into your life story.
And this really is a very
hard, conceptual thing.
I mean, it's like,
we are our story.
And then as I'm beginning
to feel or sense
because of my career,
I gather that we die,
and then we go through some
incomprehensible process.
And then apparently, to my
utter astonishment-- then,
we're back on another one.
And I say that knowing some of
the people who are allegedly
experts in reincarnation,
so that's not
where I get my take on this.
Because I don't trust
parapsychological reasoning
at all.
I am not a parapsychologist,
nor am I one
of the anti-parapsychologists--
the pseudoskeptics.
>>REGINA: You're not the head
of the skeptics society, yeah.
>>MOODY: That's the same
group, in my opinion-- the two.
They really share the same
>>REGINA: Two sides
of the same coin.
>>MOODY: Assumptions.
But I'm sort of out of
that orbit entirely.
And where I have come to sort
of accept, on some level,
that there is
reincarnation-- that actually
comes from my kids.
See, I was not born religious.
I was free from the
blight of religion
because of my circumstance
and my family.
And I just--
>>REGINA: What was
that circumstance?
>>MOODY: Well, this
is partly after--
you know, because the World
War II generation didn't talk.
We all know that.
And my dad was a medic in World
War II in the Pacific theater,
all right?
Now flash forward
to my childhood,
and my dad was very
sarcastic about religion.
And now I put it together
to see that he never
talked about the
horrible things he saw.
I suspect that he sort of
got sarcastic about religion
because of that experience.
So I grew up free of it.
And I can honest to
goodness tell you
that the first inkling
that I had that anybody
took the afterlife
question seriously
was in my first year in College
reading Plato's Republic.
And Plato immediately
became my hero.
And I realized-- this was a
blatant appeal to authority,
but I remember
reading about that
and reading in the Republic
that Plato's is very
serious about the afterlife.
So that is what woke me up to it
and the idea of the importance
of the question.
And it's still very
counterintuitive to me.
>>REGINA: Why is it
counterintuitive?
>>MOODY: Well, for one
thing, because it's
a self-contradiction.
I mean, I was a professor
of logic and philosophy
of language and Greek
philosophy before I
went to medical school.
And people say those
phrases all the time-- there
is life after death.
And it brings ideas into your
mind or images or whatever.
And so we have a comfy
feeling, like that there
must be something to it.
But in reality, there
is no cognitive concept
behind sentences like,
there is life after death.
And so to me, this is
very counterintuitive.
Now it's something
that I have come
to have to accept through a
long series of experiences--
not that I brought on myself.
When I wrote "Life after
Life," my career path
was that I was going to
be a professor of logic,
and philosophy of language,
and philosophy of medicine.
>>REGINA: Well, that flew
you right out there--
other door then.
>>MOODY: Yeah, and this
is not what I would
have chosen as my life path.
But back to the
reincarnation thing--
I have two wonderful adopted
kids-- both adopted at birth.
Carter is 19, and he is
Mexican-American by heritage,
and Carolyn is a Native American
Blackfeet Indian from Montana.
And my wife and I
don't take those kids
to any sort of
religious ceremonies.
Number two, we don't talk about
life after death in my house.
We talk about the phone bill,
what's for dinner, the movies
this weekend, the homework.
And this is not
my main interest.
My main interest is logic,
and philosophy of language,
and Greek philosophy.
So with all that, Carter,
when he was five years old,
we were watching TV and I was
flipping through the channels
and flipped through what
turned out to be the National
Geographic Channel.
And Carter became very animated.
And he said, dad, dad,
that's my village.
So he turned back.
And it was a documentary
about village life in China.
So he just started
going on and on.
Yeah, dad, before I
came to you and mom,
I was with my
brothers and sisters
and my mom and dad in China.
Similarly, my Blackfeet
daughter, this
is about seven or eight years
ago-- we were walking along
and suddenly, out of
nowhere, she said,
I don't like this place.
And it was obvious she was
talking about the world.
So one thing you learn to
do in psychiatry, which
is just so annoying for
the rest of your life,
is you don't react.
So there I was.
I just wasn't reacting.
But she could, obviously,
tell that sort of startled me.
And she said, yeah, yeah.
She said, you know when
you die, you just go up
and you be with God, she said,
until all the people you know
have died.
And then, he sends you
back as another person.
And I said, well, what
makes you think that?
And just like this, she
said, I just know in my mind.
And she said, yeah,
and I was with God,
and God pointed you out to me.
And he said, you've got to
go down to be his daughter.
So I said, well, how
did you feel about that?
And she said, oh I
didn't want to do it.
And she said, but
God pushed me--
just like this, she said--
down to be your daughter.
And I said, well, are
you glad you came anyway?
And she said, yeah.
And I don't ask them.
It's like if you ask them
anything about it, then you'd--
and I don't ask them.
But maybe because of that, they,
once in a while, go back to it.
Yeah.
And they add details.
And it's very interesting.
And so I sort of give up.
Where I have come to
in all this is that I
am a skeptic in the real sense.
These idiots who say
that they're skeptics
don't even know
what the word means.
Many of them are kind
of Houdini wannabes
or just want to
emulate their hero.
And also a lot of
them have that kind
of parapsychological mindset,
where they're interested in it,
see.
And they share the
same assumptions
with the parapsychologists.
But I am skeptic, not in
that sense that doesn't--
is just of ignoramuses who don't
even know what the word means.
I am what you call a
Pyrrhonian skeptic, which is--
Pyrrho, about 20 years after
the death of Aristotle,
formed the skeptical movement.
And what skepticism is all about
is the process of conducting
your inquiry so that
you ask every question
and you really bear down.
But in the end, you purposely
withhold the conclusion.
And so that's what it means.
>>REGINA: OK, but why would
they withhold the answer?
>>MOODY: Well, it's
really interesting,
because you know, in the
ancient philosophy-- today,
we distinguish between
the intellectual quest
and the spiritual quest.
But that kind of approach would
be incomprehensible to, say,
the early great
philosophers like Plato,
and so they didn't distinguish.
And so what the
skeptics realized
is that if you learn
logic very well,
and you follow every rule,
and you really bear down
on every question,
but then, in the end,
you withhold the
conclusion, then what
that does is two things.
Number one, it does a really
interesting thing to your mind.
It's kind of a mind
expansion experience.
That's very personal the
way it does you inside.
And it's a very desirable
kind of experience to have.
But procedurally, if you
think of it in this way
that everybody else is
rushing in this direction
to get to the conclusion,
but your technique is
to withhold a conclusion,
then what that does
is that opens up your visual--
your side vision to little
pathways of inquiring
that everybody else has missed.
And that's the purpose
of being a skeptic.
But none of the people who
call themselves skeptics
have ever even read the
classics of skepticism.
>>REGINA: No, they're not
operating from that place.
I mean, because there's usually
quite an agenda behind it
in most cases.
>>MOODY: They say
things like, oh, I'm
a skeptic about these
near-death experiences.
I think it's the
chemistry of the brain.
Well, if you unpack what
that person just said it is,
oh, I'm the person who
doesn't draw conclusions,
and my conclusion
is such and such.
They don't know what
they're talking about.
But in terms of this
process where I have been
and my process is
that this being
very counterintuitive to me,
I finally reached a point where
I just have to say, I give up.
Even knowing that they are
self-contradictory when
I bring the words to
my mouth, I nonetheless
have to say that
there is an afterlife,
and it's still shocking to me.
It's something I've
only come to in the--
and not from any
one thing, but--
for example, three, four
years ago, I was in Italy.
And after my lecture,
a surgeon came up.
And you could tell
that he was haunted--
not in a negative
way, but that you
could tell that he had
been through something
which had really changed him.
So, he led me back to the
corner of this auditorium,
and he said that
sometime before he
had been doing an elective
operative procedure
on a fairly young man who
was in overall good health.
So there was no thought
that anything might
happen during the surgery.
But in the event, the man had
a cardiac arrest on the table,
and the surgeon wasn't
able to revive him.
So, he was telling me he
was just so distressed.
He said he was just
like, oh my god.
How did this happen?
And, what am I going
to tell the family?
Whereupon he said, all of a
sudden the operating room door
swung open, and a woman
just came in, just raving.
He said at first, he
thought she was psychotic.
And you know how when
you're stressed out,
you can't figure out what
somebody else is saying?
And he said he couldn't figure
out-- what's this woman saying?
And he said he had
to literally look
into her face like,
what is she saying?
And he realized she was
saying, my husband is not dead.
She said, I was out
in the waiting room.
And she said, my
husband came to me,
and he said, you think he's dead
and that I should come in here
and tell you that he's not dead.
And the surgeon
told me he was so
flabbergasted he
doesn't even remember
resuming the resuscitation.
He just went on automatic.
But after a while, sure enough,
the heart started beating.
So, he said he was there
in the recovery room
when the patient
regained consciousness.
And the patient said to
him, I was out of my body
up there, looking
at you down there.
I could tell you
thought I was dead.
I kept trying to tell
you I'm not dead.
You wouldn't hear me, so I
went out into the waiting area,
and I tried to get
through to my wife
to come in here to
tell you I'm not dead.
Now that's one, and it
made an impact on me
perhaps because my dad
was a surgeon and all
these other things.
But this is something I've
heard from so many physicians--
about these incredible
empathic interactions
they have with their patients.
And Alfred North Whitehead
said, in formal logic,
a contradiction is regarded
as a signal of defeat.
He said, but in
the actual process
of the inquiry or
pursuit of knowledge,
that very often is
the self-contradiction
is an opening into a
new area of knowledge.
And I think that where I would
have to say is an incredible--
I mean it just is shocking
to me that at this age,
I have kind of
come to accept it.
But my mind still
fights against it.
You know, I hear all
the time these people--
and even the pseudoskeptics--
one of the things that you
hear them say all the time is,
well, we all want there to be.
And that is just totally bogus.
Not everybody wants
there to be an afterlife.
And I've got to say that
at many times in my life,
I've counted myself among
them and maybe still do
except that it just--
it's at a point to me
now where I give up.
To me, it's like, to
my utter astonishment,
I think there is an afterlife.
Now--
>>REGINA: And reincarnation?
>>MOODY: Well,
yeah, like I said,
I knew some of the people who
were so-called the experts
on reincarnation.
I don't believe that a bit.
I mean, Ian Stevenson was
a dear friend of mine.
I'm not talking behind his back.
This is what-- Ian and I had--
>>REGINA: He and Carol Bowman
had written-- you know--
>>MOODY: Ian and I
had this conversation.
>>REGINA: This is about
the past lives of children.
>>MOODY: I always
said that Ian was not
a good critical thinker.
It's like he was regarded
as such a great scholar
because his idea
of scholarship was,
as long as you got the
footnotes just right,
then anything will
pass, especially if it
fits his preconceptions, see.
I just didn't trust Ian's work
at all and none of the works
that are done at trying
to prove reincarnation.
But my take on this has come
from my personal experience.
Having kids when you're in your
50s, you observe so closely.
We didn't put any religious
stuff on these kids.
And where they
live, they wouldn't
have picked up reincarnation.
And I hear this from
people all the time who
have no interest in this stuff.
My kid is talking
about a previous life.
Well, it's just a very
hard thing to put together.
Now the big question is,
which everybody wants to know,
is there a rational credence?
Can we lend rational
credence to the afterlife?
And my answer is
resoundingly yes.
However, there is
a big difficulty
in this that was brilliantly
pointed out by Plato.
Nobody has ever
gotten further along
in the thinking about
the rational aspect
of the afterlife
question than Plato.
And what Plato says
in the Phaedo, which
is exactly right on,
he said that when
you're thinking rationally
about the afterlife question,
there's always going
to be two factors.
Number one, there
has always got to be
a story associated with it.
Because the notion is so
confusing and obscure,
that you've got to have some
sort of storyline to get
it started.
And they had the
same ones that we do.
You know, Uncle
Alex, he almost died,
and he said he got out
of his body and so on.
It's the same deal.
But then Plato went
on to say, even
if you had a billion
stories, it wouldn't add up
to rational proof
of an afterlife.
What you need is some
set of rational concepts
that can establish the
connection between the stories
and the statement
there's an afterlife.
And science is not
going to do it.
Parapsychology is
a pseudoscience.
Those are really nice people,
and they are my friends,
but if you look to
science in the year 2017
to give you reassurance
about an afterlife,
you're barking up
the wrong tree.
The afterlife question is
still a philosophical question.
It's not yet a
scientific question.
>>REGINA: I agree with that.
Now in the film, there were
so many beautiful examples
of this story.
We're going to run
a clip right now.
And what was the name
of the Russian man who--
>>MOODY: What was his name?
I don't remember.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
I can't remember,
I'm sorry, right
offhand either, but I
loved this particular
segment of the documentary.
We're just going to
go ahead and watch it.
OK?
>>MOODY: Great.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- There was absolute freedom
of your soul and body,
and this amazed me.
And this was very
interesting, too.
I was happy to be in
such an experience
because I could
see their thoughts.
I could see everything
that was happening.
I could smell.
I could hear.
And I could see their thoughts.
This was the main
thing that was very,
very making me happy and proud.
I don't know if this word
is good to use here or not,
but I was proud that I
could see their thoughts.
[END OF VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: That was
so fascinating.
He could see their thoughts.
But what he's talking
about is even beyond story.
He's talking about a
multisensorial experience.
>>MOODY: Yes.
The cognitive faculties seemed
to be expanded in this--
>>REGINA: And we think those are
the very things that die when
the body dies--
would be the five
sensory world, but that
doesn't seem to be the case.
>>MOODY: Yes, although
under questioning,
people will tell you that
they're using the word only
analogously.
People say, for example,
that vision for example--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
colors are brighter.
>>MOODY: Colors are a lot
brighter and even different.
Like, you see colors that don't
exist and that, for example,
the zoom lens effect--
when you think of
something you want
to see at a great distance,
it's like there's a zoom lens,
and suddenly you're there.
So the cognitive
faculties are enhanced.
And people say that the
words you have to use--
because that's the
closest words you have,
but it's a very
different experience
from ordinary vision.
And that it's more of
a cognitive component.
For example, people
will tell me that you
don't need to transfer
yourself from point A
to point B to get knowledge.
Space no longer
becomes an issue--
that it's all informational.
>>REGINA: Well,
like he's saying,
he could see their thoughts.
>>MOODY: Yeah, and that you
focus on a question and zap
the--
>>REGINA: Boom.
It's there.
Yeah.
So time and space are irrelevant
in that particular place.
>>MOODY: That's right.
It's just nontemporal,
nonspatial.
>>REGINA: And the
sensors seem to still
be engaged, at least in
their ability to perceive it
and bring the knowledge back?
>>MOODY: Yes.
And I'm really
puzzled about this.
What people will say to
you is that they enter
into a state of hyperreality.
You know, in the morning, when
you're coming out of a dream,
you're trying to hold
onto those bizarre images.
What is that all about?
But quickly it's receding,
and you have the feeling
you're coming back to reality.
Well, that's exactly with people
with near-death experiences
say, only that they say
that this reality here
is the dreams state.
And that as soon as you're
out of this, the details--
you're quickly
losing track of it.
And you're entering into this
hyper-real state where space
and time are not the
orienting factors--
>>REGINA: Right.
>>MOODY: --but that there
is a language barrier
that William James, the
American Psychologist,
pointed out that-- he said
the main characteristic
of this kind of experience is
ineffability-- that no matter
how articulate
the people may be,
they say that there
are no words for this.
So they're forced to
try to describe it
using only the words they have.
>>REGINA: We have another clip.
And these are Carl Jung's
words for the experiences
he had had as well,
which I think maybe not
everybody understands that he
had also had this experience--
>>MOODY: He did.
In 1944, he had a
near-death experience.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
OK, let's just go
ahead and put it up.
And we have someone narrating
his experience of it,
as he tried to
put it into words.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- At the beginning of
1944, I broke my foot.
And this misadventure was
followed by a heart attack.
Extremely strange things
began to happen to me.
It seemed to me that I
was high up in space.
Far below, I saw the
globe of the Earth blazed
in a gloriously blue light.
I saw the deep blue
sea and the continents.
I could see the
snow-covered Himalayas.
I knew that I was at the point
of departing from the Earth.
The sight of the
Earth from this height
was the most glorious
thing I had ever seen.
[END OF VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: How did
this impact his life,
having had that experience?
>>MOODY: Well, I
know that he was
interested in such
experiences in his patients
and that he described
at least one case,
I remember, of a patient that he
had who had such an experience.
And I guess a lot of other
factors enter into his life,
too, like the
mythology, and he was
interested in Native American
spirituality and so and so.
Yeah, I don't know much
about Jung, actually.
>>REGINA: OK, one thing
that people also say
is when they first
leave the body--
and I want to get into some
other subjects like suicide,
for example-- but when
people first leave the body,
some people have a different
orientation in the initial part
where it's dark.
And darkness always
seems to bring up fear.
And then fear always seems
to be of the unknown.
How have you or the
people that you've
dealt with perceived that
kind of transitional place?
>>MOODY: Yes, a small percentage
of near-death experiences
are negative.
And because they are
a small percentage,
it's harder to study them.
Generally, people who've
looked a lot into this
say that they're also more
variegated than the positive
near-death experiences.
The positive ones
are more homogeneous,
but the negative ones
are kind of spread out.
And so there are
cases, for example,
where people-- their first
experience is this darkness,
and it's anxiety provoking.
But then, as the
experience goes,
it develops into
the regular ones.
>>REGINA: Right,
it seems like it's
a stage they're passing through.
>>MOODY: Yeah, but there's that
zone of darkness and anxiety
in a few people.
>>REGINA: Does it
correlate at all
to the way in which they died?
>>MOODY: I don't know.
I haven't noticed any.
>>REGINA: Yeah, that's
why I was wondering
if there was any kind
of pattern there at all.
And so another thing
that seems to happen
is once people get
to the other side,
beings get to the other
side, is oftentimes
there are entities
waiting for them, right?
>>MOODY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Different
kinds of beings--
it can be a family member.
>>MOODY: Family member, or
very often a being of light,
a compassionate, loving presence
who sort of, very often,
takes them through a
review of their lives.
>>REGINA: Right
>>MOODY: Yeah.
>>REGINA: What
have you personally
come to in
understanding that part
of the journey of these
other dimensional beings,
perhaps being there?
And what would you
extrapolate that to be--
the relationship even when
we're in our bodies-- to be?
>>MOODY: Well, I've had a lot
of people describe that light.
And Jewish people often tend
to say, God or an angel.
Christian people tend
to say Jesus or Christ.
>>REGINA: Whatever your
orientation is, yeah.
>>MOODY: Yeah, or some people
just say a being of light.
And I think that the
message that comes across
from that part is that whatever
they're interested in-- people
say that what this
being is interested in
is how you have learned
to love, and that it's not
a judgmental thing.
A lot of people go
into the experience
of a near-death
experience, whatever,
kind of expecting judgment.
And it's a very
interesting thing
how that has come
about in the West--
this notion of judgment.
It's the Christian thing.
>>REGINA: I was going to say,
the Judeo-Christian ethic
is where you're less than.
You're not good enough.
>>MOODY: What
people don't realize
about that is that all
that came from Plato.
I mean, the
fundamentalist Christians
would be apoplectic to
hear somebody say that,
but it's historical fact.
>>REGINA: So, how did
he contribute to that?
>>MOODY: Scholars of religious
studies will tell you that
the Christian theology mostly
came from Plato's Phaedo,
which is his--
and see, Plato was what we
would call today a fascist.
He's my hero, but I'm not
sure I'd want to know Plato.
And he was a moralist, right?
So, his idea was that
it just wasn't fair
that good people and bad people
went to the same place, which
was the Greek idea.
You went to the
underworld, and you
were in this kind of dazed,
semi-conscious state,
but the bad and the good
were down there mixed.
But Plato says, no, there's
got to be a separation.
Then around the time of Christ,
when the Jewish theologians
were looking into
the afterlife, they
didn't have much of a
basis in their theology.
So, they borrowed.
They borrowed the Greek notion
of the immortality of the soul.
And it was through
their philosopher Philo,
who was a Platonist, who was
around the time of Jesus--
he was the Alexandrian
Platonist who was Jewish.
And he tried to meld the Jewish
ideas with the Platonic ideas.
And then also, they got
from the Zoroastrians
the notion of the
resurrection of the body.
So these things in
Christianity are actually
an amalgam of all these
Zoroastrian and Greek ideas.
And so that's how it came about.
>>REGINA: But in this, you do
seem to have an ever-watchful,
almost punishing God--
godhead-- that is recording
your deeds, naughty or nice
like Santa Claus on some level.
And then it's worked
its way so deeply
into our psyche
thousands of years later
and still exists that
we on our deathbed
think, oh my God, I screwed up.
I wasn't good enough.
>>MOODY: I thank
God every day that I
wasn't subjected to religion.
I like to say to people, I
talk to God all the time,
and he's never said a
word to me about religion.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Well, I'm the same.
By the time I was five,
I was like poking holes
in the stories and
said, but mom, this
doesn't even make sense.
And so I kind of disconnected
myself from those ideas.
I thought it doesn't
work like that.
So I feel very
fortunate, too, to have
been a bit of a free agent.
>>MOODY: I like to say God
is bigger than the Bible.
That's my new book
I'm working on.
>>REGINA: Oh, is it?
Wonderful.
But in fact, how many
people, when they
go through this
judgment process--
and we'll take a look at it.
I think we might have
a little clip on that--
this judgment process feel
inadequate on some level?
>>MOODY: Yeah, people
sort of go into it,
see, expecting to be judged.
And George Ritchie, who
you see on this film, was--
he said-- there he was.
He was 20 years old.
And he had been raised in this
very strict, fundamentalist
Presbyterianism.
And he said, there
he was, 20 years old,
all the things he'd
ever done in his life
were around him in this
panorama in the presence
of this being of complete love.
And he said he was expecting
to be taken to task.
And he said it wasn't that way--
that it's kind of like
an exploration process.
This life review is
that you are just
kind of-- it's not that somebody
is there to be on your case.
It's that you're looking
at it and reflecting on it.
>>REGINA: I remember at one
point in the documentary,
it was saying that oftentimes
the things you think were
your big accomplishments
in life really--
those aren't the
things that show up
as having been meaningful
in this process--
where some tiny act of just
a little act of kindness
or consideration to someone
turns out to be something
that really stands out.
>>MOODY: That's right.
People say that it's not
the big accomplishments
they had in mind that come
forth in this life review.
That it's-- very often they
don't even remember the things
that was--
very often an act
of kindness you
had done to someone without
even thinking about it.
>>REGINA: Right,
well, we're going
to take a little
look at a clip that
has to do with the presence of
the beings on the other side
and how they'll
interact with someone.
Let's take a peak.
>>MOODY: Great.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- And there was this
unconditional love,
like most parents have
for their children--
that no matter how bad
I might have been, or--
that I was totally loved
and totally understood--
and just wonderful love.
[END OF VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: Well, now,
what was interesting--
I believe she is the one who
had committed suicide, correct?
>>MOODY: She did.
She made a suicide attempt.
>>REGINA: I think she
shot herself in the chest.
>>MOODY: That's right.
>>REGINA: And they didn't go
into the back story of why she
would have done that,
but this is interesting
because oftentimes in the world
of new age philosophy and such,
if you time attempt to take
your life that you somehow--
and if you succeed--
that you've put yourself in an
interesting situation, which
we have another clip on.
I would like your thoughts
and your observations.
>>MOODY: My thought
about suicide is that--
and this statement
I make with caution.
And it's based on the people
that I know in my life
that I know well enough to make
this assertion, who are adults.
All of them are
committing suicide.
I mean, I'm going on
the cholesterol route.
My wife is going the
texting-while-driving route.
I have friends who are
drinking themselves to death,
or the people who are
smoking themselves to death.
And you know, we're
all self-destructive.
And the idea that God is
going to make a discrimination
whether somebody takes
30 minutes to do it
with pills or 30 years with
cigarettes is just ridiculous.
People's ideas of
suicide, basically,
are based about
their own guilt. They
don't want to feel
guilty, because what
if I contribute to this
other person's decision.
So they've got to
say, oh, there's
some kind of cosmological
thing about it.
But you know, I think
that self-destruction
is what we're looking at here.
And people who've had
near-death experiences
as a result of a suicide
attempt come back
and they tell me they'd
never do it again,
but not because they felt
that they were going to end up
in some terrible
hell, but because it's
kind of like walking out of
the movie before the end.
>>REGINA: OK, now
that's a good point.
Now she continues in
talking about suicide
a little bit later in the film.
>>MOODY: Oh, interesting.
>>REGINA: It was
very interesting.
Let's hear what she
had to say on that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- So there is no way
to escape that if you
try to kill yourself
and you succeed,
somehow you're going to have
to go through everything that
was painful in your life and
then have to go from the point
where you killed yourself also.
So you're not escaping.
[END OF VIDEO PLYBACK]
>>MOODY: That's right.
That's exactly what
people tell me.
>>REGINA: But that's
true whether you
take 30 years to kill yourself
through poor eating, smoking,
or whatever.
>>MOODY: Exactly.
It is.
>>REGINA: We all pick up
kind of where we left off.
Do you think there is
a distinguishing factor
between that and
what she's saying
by having ended it maybe
prematurely and quickly?
>>MOODY: I think people, when
they make that decision, say,
that was a bad move.
But not because
there's going to be
any sort of eternal punishment.
It's just like--
>>REGINA: You've just
got to pick the story up.
>>MOODY: You've got to
go through it again.
There's no words for this.
But if I would try
to word it, I would
say-- it's kind of
like-- what people
tell me is that after
a suicide attempt,
that when they get back, they
say they wouldn't do it again.
Because they had
the sense that if it
had gone through to completion,
they would be kind of placed
on a side track--
not the punishment
but a learning experience.
And that they would have to see
the consequence of their action
on all their loved ones--
like the feelings
that they had brought
about, which would be part of
the life review anyway, right?
Whatever you do to somebody
else that's unkind,
you're going to see from
their perspective in this life
review.
>>REGINA: Right.
And yes, of course.
That would bring pain.
That would bring guilt. That
would kind of get you back
on the wheel to try again.
What about the
notion of assisted
suicide, where you've
just had it-- you can't
take the suffering any longer?
>>MOODY: Yeah.
Well, the 'funda' Christians are
one of the most inimical groups
of people in our society to me.
They want to lay down the
laws for the rest of us.
And-- oh my god, what
a foul group of people.
That's all I can say.
Thank god we live in
the United States.
So at least, for the
present, we've escaped them.
But they're still
trying to take over.
They want to lay down
their moral laws, which
they don't follow very well.
But yeah, I mean,
I just think it's--
somebody who has a
terminal illness--
if you're asking me
about assisted suicide,
I mean, I think that--
I look at it a different way.
In terms of the
law, for example,
I ask myself, what would be
the long-term cumulative effect
on physicians who assisted
in assisted suicide.
See, that's the
way I think of it.
To me, I would not be
against the idea based
on it should be withheld from
somebody who is terminally ill
and wants to take that course so
as to prevent further suffering
or to free up their
families from all--
so that, I'm on board with.
The idea of whether it
would be a good thing
to incorporate that
into the medical world--
>>REGINA: And the burden
it puts on the doctors?
>>MOODY: The physician.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>MOODY: That's right.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
that's interesting.
>>MOODY: So that's
my take on it.
I don't know.
I'm glad I'm not one of the
ones that makes that decision.
>>REGINA: I think the
ones who do assist,
it's because they are
philosophically in alignment
and have agreed to be
part of that process.
>>MOODY: There's
another part of this.
It sounds shocking, but anybody
who knows about the traditions
about care for the terminally
ill and so on, it's--
the fact is, people give
the dose to ease people out,
and it's part of the culture.
But I guess it's
something you're not
supposed to talk about much, but
it's already done in reality.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>MOODY: Yeah, yeah.
And so I mean, people with
these moralistic ideas
that they want to
inflict on the rest of us
are very annoying to me.
>>REGINA: I want to
save a little time
to talk about a new
project you're working on,
which we're going to have
later conversation about.
But before that,
what, to you, are
some of the-- in terms of
the afterlife-- the most
shocking, or beautiful, and
kind of confirming cases
that you ever experienced?
>>MOODY: Oh, wow--
I mean, just so many.
>>REGINA: Are there a
couple that just jump out?
>>MOODY: Well, the one
that always jumps out
for me is Dr.
George Ritchie, who
was the finest human being
I ever knew in my life.
In 1965, I was an undergraduate
philosophy student at UVA.
And I heard from
one of my professors
that Dr. George Ritchie, who
was a professor of psychiatry
there at UVA, had had
such an experience.
Now the reason I was
interested in this
was that I knew
about the experiences
from my study of
Greek philosophy.
Because Plato, and
Democritus, and a lot
of the Greek philosophers were
interested in these things.
But George had this
phenomenal experience.
He was 20 years old.
He was pronounced dead of
double lobar pneumonia in 1943.
He was apparently dead for at
least nine minutes, whereupon
the ward boy talked the
doctor, Dr. Francie,
into injecting George into
the heart with adrenaline,
and it brought George back.
And George had this
really amazing experience
which changed my
life in the sense
that hearing it from
George, I didn't
know whether it
was quote, "real"
or not, but what I knew was
that George Ritchie was real
and just a really wonderful man.
He was also not wishy-washy.
I mean, I say a nice, sweet
person, but he was firm, too.
He had boundaries.
Once in a while, he'd blow up.
But just overall, the finest
man I ever knew in my life.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>>MOODY: It was a
turning point in my life.
And George later became
one of my best friends.
Yeah, he was a great guy.
>>REGINA: So you've been doing
this now for a lot of years.
>>MOODY: Since 1962
was when I found out
about near-death experiences
in reading Plato's Republic.
>>REGINA: And yet you are, in
the classic sense of the word,
a skeptic at heart.
And like you said, you
were in utter astonishment
to realize that we apparently
hop back on the wheel again.
All these things are
a surprise to you.
So with all of this, two
questions-- what would
you say would be your
most profound observation
about that particular phenomena?
Oh, OK.
And I'd like to know that.
And secondly, I want to know
how you feel about your own life
and how you feel about your
own death when that time comes.
OK, well number
one, as a logician,
when I teach logic,
one of the things
I tell my students is, always
draw the minimal inference
you can out of a
set of information.
Because if you draw the most
modest conclusion that you
possibly can, then you're safe.
And so let's think of the
near-death experience,
and let's just take the
life-after-death question out
of the picture for
a moment and ask,
is there anything that
is utterly stunning
and its implications
that we can draw
from the near-death experience
as an absolute certainty?
And I say absolutely there is.
And that is that
what we can draw
from the near-death experience
is the conclusion that
apparently, for many of us,
life is a two-phase process.
If you think of it, apparently,
you lived your life forward
as the actor or protagonist.
Then, there's this
180 degree turnaround.
And in a timeless state, you
re-experience that same action
from the point of view
of the other characters.
Now think about it.
At least for some of us,
life is a two-phase process.
Well, now you want
to ask, well, does
that mean that people who
have a near-death experience,
in return, are therefore in a
kind of third phase of life?
And it's very interesting that
the Greeks thought they were.
Heraclitus, who was one of
the pre-Socratic philosophers,
said that the people who have
what we call a near-death
experience are
appointed, he said,
to watch over the
living and the dead--
that they are kind of
intermediary beings.
And I think you've probably
known enough of them,
like Evan and so on, to
know that they kind of are.
So I think people who have
near-death experiences come
back in this sort of different
state from the rest of us.
So that's one thing.
And then in terms you
were asking about the way
it's impacted my life-?
>>REGINA: Yes, I wanted to--
I mean, after all
of this, certainly
you have some perhaps
impression, if not expectation,
of what that process
will be like.
>>MOODY: Well, it's
hard for me to say
what impact the near-death
experiences have had on my life
because I found out about
them when I was so young.
And it's hard to disentangle
that string of influences
in my life from all the other
things that have happened.
And also because I do seem
to be constitutionally
unable to believe that
there's life after death.
I mean, you know, when you say
that you believe something,
it's a kind of
internalization of it
that I don't understand that.
I mean, I am really
a Pyrrhonian skeptic.
And I think everybody is.
I mean, you know, when
you hear somebody say,
oh, I believe this or I believe
that, as a psychiatrist,
I look at that and say,
what's really going on
is that they're just as unsure
as I am deep down, so they're
trying to give themself
assurance by saying that,
and it's baloney.
I mean, number one, either
there is an afterlife or not.
It doesn't matter what anybody's
belief about it is, right?
So, I can't tell
you that I believe
that there's an afterlife.
What I can tell you is that
I have been driven by my life
experience to be in a
position where I'm just like--
that words have almost
been extruded from me
by my experiences.
Because I realize--
>>REGINA: It's like a
surrender, almost, to evidence.
>>MOODY: Yeah, although
I'm still fighting it.
And evidence also is a
funny word with this.
Because the real difficulty
with the rational pursuit
of the afterlife
question is that there
isn't any definition of what
evidence would be, right?
The real problem is
that if sentence,
there is life after death
doesn't make any sense, which
it doesn't, then the sentence,
there is evidence of life
after death doesn't
make any sense either.
So the fact is
that [INAUDIBLE] is
one of the most important
questions of human existence,
number one, and a very profound
and important philosophical
question; number three, not a
scientific question-- not yet.
>>REGINA: Right.
Right.
>>MOODY: But it is a
conceptual question
and a philosophical question.
And I am happy to
say here that I
have made a major breakthrough
on the rational investigation
of the afterlife question.
Now number one, the primary
resisters to this new discovery
is going to be what I call
the afterlife establishment--
the parapsychologists and not
so much the pseudoskeptics.
They will resist it, too,
but basically it's this.
The real problem of the
afterlife in the rational terms
was brilliantly
stated by David Hume,
who was one of the founders
of what we call today
the scientific mind.
He lived from 1711 to 1776.
He was a friend of Ben Franklin.
He was a Scotch philosopher
who articulated some problems
with the notion of induction
and inductive logic
like in science and also
with the notion of causation.
So basically, Hume
was asked to write
an essay on the
afterlife question,
and this is what he said.
And if you follow these
words as I say them,
you will see that he
was absolutely right on.
Hume said by the
mere light of reason,
it seems difficult to prove
the immortality of the soul.
Now that's an understatement.
>>REGINA: By the
mere light of reason.
>>MOODY: That's right.
And then he went ahead to
say, some new species of logic
is required for that purpose and
some new faculties of the mind
that they may enable us
to comprehend that logic.
And when Hume said that, he
was probably being ironic.
And probably what he meant
is that it's impossible.
But either way, he got the
criterion-- he nailed it down.
That is the fact, if you
think about this logically.
Now number one, not
everybody is really
interested in the rational
proof of an afterlife.
And a lot of people who say
that they are or are not really.
Because what they want
is some more stories.
They just want to hear more
of the same kind of stories
and all.
But as Plato pointed out, if
you had a billion stories,
it wouldn't-- you've got to
have some sort of conceptual
apparatus.
Now what I can confidently say
is I've solved that problem.
And I didn't do it in relation
to the afterlife question.
It's that my interest is in
logic, and the way you think,
and philosophy of
language and so on.
So basically, I've
solved Hume's problem.
And what I've done is
that I've developed
a set of rational
principles that
enable us to think
logically about things
that, in the linguistic
sense, don't make any sense.
And so basically, I realized 23,
24 years ago, that eventually,
somebody who had learned
my system of logic
would just happen to have
a near-death experience.
And for reasons that I
could explain to you--
it would take a while-- but
just to get to the point--
that I realized that
somebody in that situation--
that going into the near-death
experience with a preexisting
set of rules and
principles for thinking
about nonsensical things
would be forced or compelled
to articulate that
experience in a new way that
differs from the ordinary.
The reason is, near-death
experiences or stories are
nonsensical travel narratives.
Because the presupposition is
number one, there are no words.
And also, it was not
in time and space.
But the closest account
they can give us
is that I got out of my body.
I went through a
tunnel into a light.
I came back to my body
and returned to life.
That's a travel narrative.
But there is no
way to understand
the meaning of a
travel narrative
as if there's no time and space.
Think about it.
So there's that structural flaw.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
it's that conundrum.
But you said, in
Hume's statement,
we'd have to have
some new faculty.
So you're bringing into
play the notion of a faculty
that you've observed
and now dissected
to add rational proof
to the afterlife?
>>MOODY: Yes, you can
absolutely open up
cognitive faculties of your mind
that you didn't know you had.
Now not a lot of people-- it's
like America, we've gotten--
we know more--
yet, it's all instant
gratification there, right?
So a lot of people
are going to hear that
and they say, oh it's a
new way to open my mind,
a new way of om or whatever.
It's not that.
This is something that
takes application.
But you can go through a way
of reformatting your mind
where you open up--
you have in there-- you
have cognitive
faculties that you
don't know that
you have that have
to do with processing language
that is unintelligible.
And so once you open
that up, then you
have new ways of thinking
about the afterlife.
To make a long story
short, I knew full well
that eventually this was going
to happen October 15, 2015.
I got a call from this
guy-- a really wonderful man
who's a renowned
artist and scientist.
And he had been in
my nonsense course--
maybe six, seven,
eight years before.
And he was calling me
then not about that
but about his
near-death experience.
He had developed this
horrific infection--
just horrible-- H1N1 flu.
And I just won't go
into the details.
It was gosh awful.
But during that period, I think
he had three cardiac arrests
and near-death experiences.
So that was the
point of the call.
And he was telling me about all
this and in a very weak voice.
But suddenly, his
voice became clear,
and it's like this energy.
And he said, and Raymond, he
said, when I was over there,
he said, my mind
went back to what
you said about the nonsense.
And he said, I realized
you were right.
And to quote him
exactly he said,
I realized that in order
to understand how that
is connected to this world--
then, to use his
exact words, he said,
"You've got to take the
unintelligibility axis
into account."
And I'm saying this not
to brag but to challenge.
I have made a breakthrough
in the rational investigation
of the afterlife.
It's not going to be appealing
to the parapsychologists.
What they are basically into is
stories, however they want to--
this is not stories.
>>REGINA: It's more conceptual.
Yes.
Exactly.
OK, we're going to have
that conversation next time.
>>MOODY: Great.
Perfect.
>>REGINA: Because the point--
you're going to get
to the bottom of this
and, whether you like it or
not, you're going to prove--
>>MOODY: Not prove that
there's an afterlife
but to open up a new way
to investigate the question
and to do it by opening
faculties of your mind
that you didn't know you
have and pointing out
to you principles of reason
that are obvious once you think
about them but that were
ruled out, essentially,
by Aristotle's
compulsive nature.
Plato was well on the
way to understanding
how meaningless, unintelligible
language operates
in his dialogue the Parmenides.
Aristotle, who codified
logic, predicated it
on literal meaning and
true or false statements.
So you can't process the
afterlife question that way.
But if you go back to what
Plato was trying to do
and you add some rules
and provisions to how
to think about things
that don't make sense,
then you've got to know what--
so I am going to say that,
yeah, I'll make that challenge.
I'll give you all my material.
I'll show you some exercises--
sense exercises and all--
that you can do with
this, and we'll see.
>>REGINA: I can
tell you are always
going to withhold the
conclusion on one level.
>>MOODY: Well, because it's
the best way to proceed.
>>REGINA: It keeps
the exploration,
the peripheral
exploration alive.
>>MOODY: It does.
>>REGINA: I understand
what you're saying.
>>MOODY: It does.
>>REGINA: But the
reality also is, you
can't deny there's
something to this.
>>MOODY: Well, I didn't know
what to think in those terms.
But where I am
now is, I give up.
It's more like--
>>REGINA: Surrender.
>>MOODY: --not that I've
reached a conclusion.
It's just that I can't figure
out any way out of this
without having to say in a
stammering fashion that yeah,
there is an afterlife.
>>REGINA: On that note, we've
got you saying it on camera.
And so until next time,
thank you so much, Raymond.
>>MOODY: Thank you.
It's been great.
>>REGINA: I love the fact
that your mind is as it is.
Because for all the
people that have
conflicts over the notion of
spirituality and religion.
>>MOODY: The most
important thing
is to admit that
you're ignorant.
>>REGINA: That's true.
>>MOODY: And I am ignorant.
And I am pleased that, to
me, the whole process of--
the intellectual
process is just fine.
I'm trying as best I can
to learn as much as I can,
but I realize that
there's not much I can do.
>>REGINA: On that,
thank you so much.
>>MOODY: Thank you.
>>REGINA: I look forward
to our next conversation.
>>MOODY: Me, too!
>>REGINA: It's going
to be a complex one.
It's going to go in places
I haven't been before,
so I'm looking forward to it.
>>MOODY: Maybe you should get
some consultants on it, too.
Like, your husband
could look at it.
>>REGINA: Oh, he
would love that.
When you send us the
material, he'll--
his mind is like yours.
He'll be on it.
>>MOODY: Great.
>>REGINA: So meanwhile, again,
I cannot recommend the film that
we've just shown
you clips of enough.
It's really beautiful
to have on hand
when people need that
at this phase of life,
as are all these conversations.
Meanwhile, you might also
enjoy my previous conversation
with Doctor Moody here
in the Gaia archives.
We talked about that
a little bit ago.
Until next time, thank you
for joining us on Open Minds.
[THEME SONG]